# Problem 5

> Refs & people discussed with:
>
> b09902011

## 1

### Reduction

1. If $T > \sum{a_+}$ or $T < \sum a_-$, just return "no". $a_+=\{a_i | a_i>0\}$ and $a_-=\{a_i | a_i<0\}$.

2. Choose $K = 1+\sum_{i=0}^{n} |a_i|$.

3. Define transformation $f$ as:
   $$
   f(a_1, a_2, \cdots, a_n;T) = (a_1+K, a_2+K, \cdots, a_n+K, \underbrace{K,\cdots,K}_{n K's};T+nK)
   $$

### Correctness

The first step filters impossible cases.

Let $L=(a_1, a_2, \cdots, a_n;T)$ be an instance of $JJBAP$, $f(L)$ be an instance of $JJBAP_+$.

#### $L$ is yes $\Rightarrow$ $f(L)$ is yes

Suppose $S$ is a subsequence of $a$ that solves $L$. $\sum S = T$.

The solution $S'$ to $f(L)$ can be constructed by selecting $s_i+K$ for all $s_i \in S$ and $n-|S|$ $K$'s.
$$
\sum S' = (\sum S) + |S|K + (n-|S|)K = T+nK
$$
#### $f(L)$ is yes $\Rightarrow$ $L$ is yes

Suppose $S'$ solves $f(L)$. $\sum S' = T+nK$.

The solution $S$ to $L$ can be constructed by selecting $s'_i - K$ from $a$ for all $s'_i \in S'$. During selection, $s'_i-K=0$ but there are no $0$'s left, it means $s'_i$ correspond to one of the $n$ $K$'s'.

Because $K > \sum |a_i| > \max|a_i|$, for any subsequence $C$ of $\{a_1+K, a_2+K, \cdots, a_n+K,\underbrace{K,\cdots,K}_{n K's}\}$:
$$
\begin{alignat*}{2}
(-\sum |a_i|) + |C|K 	&\le \sum C&&\le (\sum |a_i|) + |C|K\\
(|C|-1)K 				&\le \sum C&&\le (|C|+1)K \\
\frac{\sum C}{K} - 1  	&\le |C|&&\le \frac{\sum C}{K} + 1 \\
\\
\frac{T+nK}{K}-1 = \frac{T}{K}+(n-1)
&\le|S'|&&\le\frac{T+nK}{K}+1 = \frac{T}{K}+(n+1) \\
n-1 &< |S'|&&< n+1 \\
\end{alignat*}
$$
Therefore $S'$ has exactly $n$ elements, and:
$$
\sum S = (\sum S') - |S'|K = T+nK-nK=T
$$

### Polynomial time complexity

Detection in the first line and the transformation can be naively done in $O(n)$ time.

## 2

### Reduction

1. Transform $JJBAP$ instance $L$ to $JJBAP_+$ instance $f(L)=(b;T')$ by the method in subproblem 1.
2. Add $b_{2n+1} = |\sum b-2T'|$ to construct sequence $b'$.

### Correctness

Transformation from $JJBAP$ to $JJBAP_+$ has been proved in subproblem 1. Therefore we prove $JJBAP_+$ is yes $\iff$ $QQP$ is yes.

#### $JJBAP_+$ is yes $\Rightarrow$ $QQP$ is yes

Suppose $S$ solves $JJBAP_+$, and $\hat{S}=\{b_i|b_i \in (b -S) \}$. Let $H=\sum b$.

$\sum S = T'$ and $\sum \hat{S} = H-T'$.

- If $H \ge 2T'$
  
  - Add $b_{2n+1} = H-2T'$ to $S$ to construct $S'$.
  
  - $$
  \sum S'
  = T'+(H-2T') =H-T'
  = \frac{H+(H-2T')}{2}
  = \frac{\sum b+b_{2n+1}}{2}
  = \frac{\sum b'}{2}
  $$
  
- If $H < 2T'$
  - Add $b_{2n+1} = 2T'-H$ to $\hat{S}$ to construct $\hat{S'}$.
  - $$
  \sum \hat{S'}
  = (H-T')+(2T'-H)
  = T'
  = \frac{H+(2T'-H)}{2}
  = \frac{\sum b+b_{2n+1}}{2}
  = \frac{\sum b'}{2}
  $$

####  $QQP$ is yes $\Rightarrow$ $JJBAP_+$ is yes 

Suppose $S'$ solves $QQP$ and $\hat{S'}=\{b_i|b_i \in (b -S) \}$.

- If $H \ge 2T'$
  
  - $\sum S' = \frac{H+(H-2T')}{2} = H-T' = \sum \hat{S'}$
  
  - Remove $b_{2n+1}$ from the subsequence it belongs, and the sum of that subsequence becomes $H-T' - (H-2T') = T'$.
  
- If $H < 2T'$

  - $\sum S' = \frac{H+(2T'-H)}{2} = T' = \sum \hat{S'}$
  - The subsequence that doesn't contain $b_{2n+1}$ has sum $T'$.


### Polynomial time complexity

First step takes polynomial time (shown in subproblem 1). Second step takes another $O(2n)=O(n)$ time.

## 3

### $DDBP$

Given $n$ balls with weight $a_1, \cdots, a_n \in [0,1]$ and bound $N$. Is it possible to partition balls into less or equal to $N$ bins such that all bins weigh at most 1 kilogram.

### Reduction

1. Let $M=\frac{\sum a}{2}$. If there is an $a_i > M$, return no. Because $QQP$ obviously has no solution in this case.

2. Define transformation:

$$
f(a_1, a_2, \cdots, a_n)
  = (\frac{a_1}{M}, \frac{a_2}{M}, \cdots, \frac{a_n}{M}; 2)
$$

### Correctness

#### $QQP$ is yes $\Rightarrow$ $DDBP$ is yes

Suppose $S$ solves $QQP$. $\sum S = \sum (a-S) = M$.

Simply choose $\frac{s_i}{M}$ to construct $S'$. $\sum S' = \sum \frac{s_i}{M} = \frac{\sum S}{M} = 1$.

The remaining balls has sum $\sum (a'-S') = \frac{\sum a}{M} - 1 = 2 - 1 = 1$.

#### $DDBP$ is yes $\Rightarrow$ $QQP$ is yes

Suppose $a'$ is partition into $S'_1$ and $S'_2$. $\sum S'_1 \le 1$ and $\sum S'_2 \le 1$ 

Because $\sum a' = \sum \frac{a_i}{M} = \frac{\sum a}{M} = 2$, $\sum S'_1 = \sum S'_2 = 1$.

Transform each element in $S'_1$ and $S'_2$ back yields $S_1$ and $S_2$. Both have sum $1 \times M = M = \frac{\sum a}{2}$.

### Polynomial time complexity

Both steps in reduction takes $O(n)$ time.

### $QQP \le_p DBP$

The decision version $DDBP \le_p DBP$. And as shown above, $QQP \le_p DDBP$.

By transitivity, $QQP \le_p DBP$.

## 4

### NP-ness

If $S$ is said to solve $QQP$, we can verify by summing $S$ and $a$, which is done in $O(n)$ (polynomial) time.

If partition $P$ is said to solve $DDBP$, we can verify by summing and checking each bin in $O(n)$ (polynomial) time.

### NP-completeness

Since $JJBAP$ is known to be NP-complete, and by the result above we have $JJBAP \le_p QQP \le_p DDBP$. Therefore $QQP$ and $DDBP$ is NP-hard.

Because $QQP$ and $DDBP$ are both NP and NP-hard, they are NP-complete.

## 5

Suppose there exist a $\frac{3}{2}-\epsilon$-approximation polynomial time algorithm $\text{Orcale}$ for $DBP$.

Transform an instance of $QQP$ to $DBP$ by $f(a_1, a_2, \cdots, a_n)
  = (\frac{a_1}{M}, \frac{a_2}{M}, \cdots, \frac{a_n}{M})$ where $M = \frac{\sum a}{2}$.

If $(a_1,\cdots,a_n)$ is solvable for $QQP$, $DBP$ should output 2, and $\text{Orcale}$'s output $c$ should satisfy:
$$
\begin{aligned}
\frac{c}{2} &\le \frac{3}{2} - \epsilon \\
c &\le 3 - 2\epsilon \\
c &< 3 \\
\Rightarrow c &= 2
\end{aligned}
$$
And for any unsolveable $(a_1,\cdots,a_n)$, $c \ge 3$. So $QQP(a_1, \cdots,a_n)$ is yes $\iff$ $\text{Oracle}$ outputs 2.

Therefore, $\text{Oracle}$ can solve $QQP$ in polynomial time. But since we assume P $\neq$ NP and $QQP$ is NP-complete, $\text{Oracle}$ must not exist.

## 6

Because the lowest weight per ball is $c$, the largest number of balls that fits is $\lfloor \frac{1}{c} \rfloor$.

Denote the number of type $i$ balls chosen into a single bin be $x_i$. To calculate the upper bound of possible choices, let's assume that they all have enough supply.

This should be satisfied:
$$
\begin{aligned}
\sum_{i=1}^{m} x_i &\le \lfloor \frac{1}{c} \rfloor \\
x_i &\ge 0 &\forall\ 1 \le i\le m\\
\end{aligned}
$$
Let $x_{m+1} = \lfloor \frac{1}{c} \rfloor - \sum_{i=1}^{m} x_i$. We can rewrite it as:
$$
\begin{aligned}
\sum_{i=1}^{m+1} x_i &= \lfloor \frac{1}{c} \rfloor \\
x_i &\ge 0 &\forall\ 1 \le i\le m+1\\
\end{aligned}
$$
And the upper bound of possible choices is the combinations of $x_i$:

$$
\frac{(\lfloor\frac{1}{c}\rfloor + m)!}{(\lfloor\frac{1}{c}\rfloor)!m!}
$$

## 7

Suppose there are $x_i$ bins with $i$-th "choice of balls in a bin". This should be satisfied:
$$
\begin{aligned}
\sum_{i=1}^{M} x_i &= k \\
x_i &\ge 0 &\forall\ 1 \le i\le M\\
\end{aligned}
$$
And the number of "combination of $x_i$ that satisfies this" is:
$$
\begin{aligned}
\frac{(k+M-1)!}{k!(M-1)!} &= \frac{1}{(M-1)!}(k+(M-1))(k+(M-2))\cdots(k+1) \\
&\lt 1 \times (k+M)^{M-1} \\
&\le (Mk + kM)^{M-1} \text{ (Because $k>1$ and $M>1$)}\\
&\lt (Mk + kM)^{M} = (2M)^M k^M\\
\end{aligned}
$$
Therefore it can be bound with $C_M = (2M)^M$.

## 8

### Algorithm

1. Compute $c$ and $m$ for the given $n$ balls.
2. Generate all "choices of balls that fits in a bin" by brute-force.
3. Start with lower bound 1 and upper bound $n$, binary search the minimum number of needed bins.
   - To examine a mid-point $p$, find a way to put all the balls inside $p$ bins by brute-forcing all possible combinations.
4. Return the result of binary search.

### Time complexity

1. Use a set to maintain how many kinds of weight there are. Step 1 takes $O(n)$ time.
2. Brute-forcing went through all possible combinations. Step 2 takes $O(M)$ time.
3. Each examination takes $O(n^{M})$ time. So the entire binary search takes $O(\log{n}) \cdot O(n^M)$ time.

Total time complexity is $O(n) + O(M) + O(\log{n}) \cdot O(n^M) = O(n^M\log{n}) = O(n^{M+1})$.
