# Problem 6

b09902004 資工二 郭懷元

> Refs:
>
> https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Christofides_algorithm

## 1

A graph $G(V,E)$ contains an Eulerian cycle if and only if $deg(v)$ is even $\forall\ v\in V$.

## 2

Consider an undirected graph $G$ with 0 edge at start. Because all vertices has degree 0 (even), $|V'| = 0$.

For each edge added, only degrees of the two vertices on this edge change, and there are three cases:

- Case 1: Both vertices were with even degree.

  Since they both change from even to odd, $|V'|$ is increased by 2.

- Case 2: Both vertices were with odd degree.

  Since they both change from odd to even, $|V'|$ is decreased by 2.

- Case 3: One vertex has odd degree and the other has even.

  Since one will change from odd to even, and the other will change from even to odd, $|V'|$ remains the same.

In all three cases, the parity of $|V'|$ always remains the same, which is even. Since a tree is an undirected graph, $|V'|$ is also even.

## 3

Suppose $cost(M) \gt OPT/2$.

Let $C$ be a cycle that yields $OPT$, and $C$ contains edges $c_1 , c_2 , \cdots , c_{|V'|}$.

Both $C_\text{odd}=\{c_{2k-1} | 0 \lt k \le \frac{|V'|}{2}\}$ and $C_\text{even}=\{c_{2k} | 0 \lt k \le \frac{|V'|}{2}\}$ are perfect matchings. And because $cost(C_\text{odd})+cost(C_\text{even})=OPT$, $\min\{C_\text{odd},C_\text{even}\} \le OPT/2 \lt cost(M)$ .

By choosing the one with smaller cost, we have a cost lower than $cost(M)$. $M$ doesn't have the minimum cost, which contradicts with the fact that $M$ is optimal.

Therefore $cost(M)$ must be less than or equal to $OPT/2$.

## 4

### Algorithm

1. Find a minimum spanning tree $T$ of $G$.

2. Let $O$ be the set of vertices with odd degree in $T$. By subproblem 2, $|O|$ is even.

   Run $\text{Oracle}(O,E)$ to find a minimum perfect matching $M$.

3. Construct graph $H=T \cup M$.

4. Find a Eulerian cycle in $H$. 

   1. Start from an arbitrary vertex $v$, and just follow any unvisited edges and keep going until we select an edge back to $v$. Because every vertices have even degree, every time we visit a vertex there is an edge out.
   2. If we select an edge back to $v$, choose other available edges if possible. If there are no available edges left, go back to $v$ and complete the cycle.

5. Use this cycle to construct tour $P$ by skipping repeated vertices.

### $\frac{3}{2}$ - approximation

Let the optimal tour be $P^*$. $OPT = cost(P^*) \ge cost(T)$.

By triangle inequality, $cost(P) \le cost(H)$
$$
\begin{aligned}
cost(H)
&= cost(T \cup M) \\
&\le cost(T) + cost(M) \\
&\le OPT + \frac{OPT}{2} = \frac{3}{2} OPT \\
\end{aligned}
$$

### Polynomial time complexity

1. Prim's algorithm can find a MST in polynomial time.
2. $\text{Orcale}$ runs in polynomial time.
3. Constructing $H$ can be done naively in $O(|V|+O|E|)$ time.
4. Finding a Eulerian cycle takes $O(|E|)$ time.
5. Constructing $P$ takes $O(|V|)$ time.
6. Algorithm in total takes polynomial time.
